Hello and welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast.
Thank you so much our dear listener for listening to this podcast without you, this would not
be possible.
So thank you very much.
This podcast is brought to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are charity that empowers users to control technology.
I'm Bonnie Mehring and today I'm here with Nico Rikken.
Nico is a long-term FSFE volunteer and yeah he has been around for quite a while now and I'm
very very happy to have you here Nico on the Software Freedom Podcast.
Thank you so much for making it.
Yeah, hi, Bonnie.
Thanks for having me.
It's great to be on the podcast.
So far we have never managed to record an episode before, right?
So this is the first time you're here but we did record the ending of one episode.
Yeah, that's true.
So then was my first first appearance on the podcast and now let's see what we end up.
Very, very curious.
All right, Nico how did your journey with the FSFE start and then exactly did you join the FSFE?
I joined the FSFE in the beginning of May 2014 and I was invited on the mailing list
and there I was invited by Felix to also come to the local Nijmegen Linux user group
which is quite close to where I live.
So I joined and then Felix immediately asked,
fired at me like, oh yeah, T-DOSE is coming up.
Will he want to join and there will be good and you can help with the booth.
So before I know it, there was T-DOSE.
And then before I know it, it was, well, if you like T-DOSE, you might as well come to FOSDEM.
And for me, even coming to the local Linux user group, before going there,
for me free and open source software was something that I was doing online,
on my room, on the couch with the laptop, reading, maybe posting some things.
And then to be in a group of people that all think along the same lines as you do,
there was so heartwarming that I wanted to have more of that and I found that from the Linux user
group then to T-DOSE and then to, wow, if you look at FOSDEM, it's overwhelming the amount
of energy and like many people that you meet there. So that's really great.
So because I've had this very interesting, now you had this local user,
Linux user group, who is also connected to the FSFE with Felix and who invited you to the mailing
list and invited you to all of those events. But you are very much engaged with all of us now,
like you're, you could be our co-workers, that's how much you do for the FSFE sometimes.
So I'm wondering, what made you stick around there? Like, I joined the FSFE to make an impact
in the world. At least that was my idea because I found it important. Also at that time,
there was the Snowden leaks. I thought there's a lot of people concerned about privacy, but actually,
how do you get privacy when you have no control on the devices underpinning that privacy in the digital
world? And I didn't see many people having that mindset that there was really important.
And looking for that, I found that FSFE. I was familiar with that by the open source software,
but I wasn't as much familiar with the ideas behind it. And looking at FSFE is like,
ah, would there be a European counterpart? And before I know that, I found FSFE. And
getting more engaged with FSFE, I found lots of friendly people, and we were all trying to
make an impact. And I could really see the impact that we were making. And it's also a nice European
network to, yeah, being engaged with different cultures, different viewpoints, and everybody so
friendly. And yeah, I really like that. So for me, it's on one hand doing something that's
good for society, I think. I'm really convinced about that. But also, we do it together with the
whole whole community of FSFE, which gives me a lot of energy and fulfillment. Wow, thank you very
much. Very happy to have you here. And I hope we keep having you around for quite a while.
Yeah, thank you. I'm sure I will. So today we will be talking about the Dutch conference called
T-DOSE. I'm not quite sure if I'm pronouncing this correct. I guess I am. It's English, or?
Yeah, I think it's intended to be pronounced English. Everybody talks about T-DOSE.
But the funny thing is, it could be a play on words, I don't know, but with a T-Box, but I don't
know if that's a case. It has been called that. That's actually really funny. I will keep that in mind.
But I don't know the origin of the name, actually. So that's the story I can't tell much about.
Ah, alright. Don't worry. We will have enough to talk about, because this conference T-DOSE
has just happened over the six and sevenths of June, so basically last weekend.
Yeah, that was great. So we had a 20th edition of the T-DOSE conference. There was some
of course, there were some editions that were skipped due to the pandemic and some other issues.
But yeah, 20 editions, so that's nice. That's really, really nice. But where the editions,
like during the pandemic, were there some online editions, or was this just there and merely
like skipped and there was nothing happening? Yeah, it was quite tragic, I think, for T-DOSE.
It's that before T-DOSE was in a school building. So after you had your high school, you could
do studies there. And we had the whole place for the whole weekend. But unfortunately, we
could no longer host T-DOSE there. And so the organization then was looking for another venue
and then COVID hit. So there was like, I guess, three consecutive years of no conference,
so that it is hard with all the continuity of such a conference. But ever since the pandemic,
we're slowly growing in terms of attendees and the program and the organization. So I think
last weekend was another bigger turnout than the year before and the year before that. So it's
we're on an upward trend. Okay, so but let's take a step back and for everybody out there, what is T-DOSE?
T-DOSE is the technical Dutch open source event. And it was started with the intention of being
like a Mini-FOSDEM, or maybe not even mini, I don't know how the big ideas were at the time,
but it's like we should have like something like FOSDEM in the Netherlands, specifically around
the region of Eindhoven. And it is in a way like Fossom that it's free admittance. There's a
couple of tracks. The talks are on the one hand, they are technical, but also more entry level and
more different kind of aspects about society, impact, could be privacy. There was a workshop
last weekend about musical, so about editing musical annotations of sheet music. So there's
a part of the program that can go in different directions. And I think that specifically the fact that
it's free admittance and that it's a number of booths also from community projects like including
the FSFE, but also about Debian and the local hackerspace and some others. It really has this
community vibe to it. And some people are just living there locally, they come to see what's up,
sometimes you have people from the community that only have a couple of hours to spend,
then they draw by and say hello. So it's a really easy sort of family-like event.
That sounds really cozy. Yeah it is. Is it like that the Dutch people come together,
or are there also people from outside of the Netherlands?
I've mentioned people there over the years that were not from the Netherlands,
but that's a rarity I'd say. All right. Why is it focused on Eindhoven?
I think they just started it. The first edition was a university of Eindhoven.
And yeah, there was no reason to leave the region also because the main volunteers are from the
region. And well, the region itself, proud of itself, are being the brain port region.
So there should be enough tech and IT to go around. Okay, so this is like the technical center
of the Netherlands. Depends on your ask. So if you talk about finance and maps about the
Tom Tom booking the big right, that's all an Amsterdam. But if outside of that anything chips and
better, I'd say yeah, then the brain port region around Eindhoven is so maybe even more high tech,
but that depends on how you look at it. All right. Now I learned something new. Thank you very much.
Okay, so this T-DOSE started 20 years ago. This makes 2006. And during those past years,
you joined the core team of T-DOSE and also you're now like organizing T-DOSE with others.
How did this all start? Of course, I was already attending T-DOSE
most of the editions ever since I joined. And I was familiar with the people from the community
also through other events. And it's like, hey Niko, you're also and this more has maybe more to do
with my day job. You're also involved with the public sector and could you maybe help us
get more of the public sector and highlight all the good stuff that is happening in the Netherlands and
work on a track? Well, we didn't. I didn't manage to fill a whole track that year, but I did find
some speakers. And before I know it, it's like, oh, you have some good skills that we could use
in the core team, which you want to help volunteer. So it was like three years ago. And yeah,
trying to make the most of it. I mean, my time is limited. I try to help where I can. I'd say the
rest of the core team is doing way more than I do, but I try to help where I can. That sounds
really good. That sounds like you're a really close team and you're trying to get together and
basically organize a conference for everybody in the Netherlands. Yes, we really try to make it
a good cool event, get a good program. I'd say it's also a challenge with having such a team,
which from the first community, we want to do all of everything ourselves. So we do the web server
and we do the mail server and the website and everything. So it's quite a bit of a workload
outside of even hosting the venue and getting the speakers and the booths and sponsors. Of course,
that so much needed. I see. I needed to smile now because I'm like, isn't this the same
of every single conference all over Europe? Everybody is like, I need my own infrastructure. I'm hosting
this myself and I just think it's, I don't know why this is the case. You know what I mean?
Yeah, this is sort of a bootstrapping problem. You have to get off the ground and who helps you.
I must say I was also involved last year with the Postgres Day event, PG Day, you know.
And in that case, it was really nice to be piggybacking on the Postgres Europe organization.
I used that infrastructure for ticket sales and I think also for hosting the website and there
was the Postgres community from the UK, I think, already had a template for the website. So
bootstrapping a new conference in that way was rather easy. So I think it would be nice if there
was more like that. But then thinking of it now, there's already pre-talks as sort of a main
conference organizing software that we also leverage in TIDOS. So it's also a way to share and collaborate.
Absolutely, absolutely. There are quite a lot of free software projects out there that make
organizing conferences way more easy. And pre-talks is definitely one of them.
So who is with you in the quarantine? I'm guessing it's not only you.
No, that would be Wienke and Johan, a couple that I've known as long as I've been to TIDOS.
They're really the backbone and carry also the weight in other conferences.
And then Peter and Nick, Nick recently joined, but he's given a lot of energy to the team.
So that's good. Yeah, Peter as a chair, I think the amount of hours he puts in is overwhelming.
And I should not forget Marta also talking IT infrastructure and the design because
yeah, we're on a podcast, so you can't see, but the sticker I have last week and I had is
an online effort person with a festive head for the 20-year celebration. And each and every year we
have a different icon. And also Nina is the daughter of Johan and Wienke who made the characters
for the last few years. And so each and every year we try to get a unique design.
And they'll get printed on shirts, they'll get printed on marks. So before you know,
if you attend TIDOS, you have a whole stack of marks and T-shirts of each and every edition.
Okay, now I definitely need to come next year.
All right, so this is quite a full team. And what's the something that you find really outstanding
and that really struck you off TIDOS where you're like, oh, this is a point of view that I have
not thought about before. I was mostly manning the booth. So I didn't see much talks, but in one
of the discussions we had about digital autonomy at the booth and sort of devil's advocate question
that came up was, well, how do you think we can establish a digital autonomy in Europe and a
free and open source software business ecosystem? If there's no sort of a thin layer of a
proprietary around the free and open source software to have like a cutting edge and to make sure
you're not undercut by other players in a global market. So I think that was a there was a very
I think there was a spicy question to make you think like how do we see to support our free
no source ecosystem and make sure that the businesses that put in the effort are driving and can
stay competitive. So the question was how to support free ends of their businesses and how they
can still be competitive then in the free market against such monopolies. Yeah.
Second to last episode. So SFP 50 it could be and I now find this very interesting because he
also talked about monopolies and he was also pointing out how important the next generation
internet program is in this regard because it is supporting those kinds of projects and also for
the FSFE do keep calling for a long term funding of free software projects because basically all
of those free software projects all of you know this is case the comics so I don't need to
reference it more but all the free software projects they are also in other projects like
non free software projects and they do need this kind of project even the monopolies because
they are built on those and therefore we do need this long term funding that the FSFE is calling
for. What do you think about that answer? I think that's very good especially from from the
standpoint of FSFE that makes a whole lot of sense I think it's for the business associations
so in the nanos we recently had a business association sort of get a revival the Dutch open source
business alliance and I think it's more for them to also say okay we need businesses and
competitiveness which may be less of a concern for FSFE I think we both want a thriving
fossil ecosystem. Absolutely. Was there something else that you found really that struck you
or where you thought like oh this tea does is especially nice compared to other conferences
or like yeah anything in digital guard. Tea does for me really has this community feel of people
that are really fast-minded and it's not a regular tech conference but also it's a smaller scale
maybe a way smaller scale than something like foster them so even mounting the booth of the FSFE
at a certain time it was a bit low traffic because I was interesting talks going on and I had a chat
with Sondorf was from the UB-ports booth as well from the community and he happens to be a teacher
as well so what we're looking with the ad on Sangamon book is how can we leverage that book in education
and we had a couple of chats all about that already at other events and this was a moment
where we met and we had some time on our hands and we really started to go down
like how does the Dutch education system work what are the terms that all the schools have to
meet and how the book fit in so we now have I'm at least have some ideas how we can get to a
concrete proposal to have a document added to the book that will help use the book in schools
for anything digital digital education that's pretty cool yeah there's quite a number of people
from the free and open source software community that I've come to know from Tidos
because it's a rather it's a smaller event so you have more time on our hands to talk to certain
people that's and then ideas like this get started that sounds really nice
so will you be following up on that or what will be happening there next I think I just
pressured myself by putting it in a podcast but I intend to I'm sorry for that you can tell me if
I should cut it out no no I think it's all good and and actually one of the challenges there
specifically about the education is that this is this is diverse across Europe so we have a
a Dutch inside with Dutch terms and what is required but there's a whole international aspect
today so we need to get started and then collaborate across nations to see how do we get something
universal or that can be converted but you need to keep me posted on that so we need to do a
another episode about how and Sangaman arrived in the Netherlands in the school system that will be
great yeah all right but do you have for Tidos do you have something to recommend to all of us
on us to have a look at yeah so most of the talks are actually recorded and they were live streamed
this year last year they were recorded and broadcasted also on peer tube this year they were even
live streamed to peer tube so the live stream should already be up if I understand correctly
and one of the talks that had multiple people talked to me about how great it was was the talk
by Michael Boelen there was a we promote and talk about open but are we actually doing it
enough and what I got from other people because I didn't attend the talk instead it was very much
about how to engage newcomers and and invite them in our false community one of the examples he
was working on last year is to make a very beginner friendly Linux tutorial and write it in
Dutch so it's really accessible and make it sort of universal so it's not just oh this is the
the Debian guide or this is the Fedora guide now it is generic Linux and doesn't introduction
and also that the way we provide present information and write the documentation has to be done
with care to make sure that people can follow along and not that halfway through reading a
tutorial they think oh this is too complex I lost what I was doing again and then
they never get into it I know what you mean so that it's like more of a aiming to unbord people who
are like not the technical kind of people but who would also like to be able to use Linux
indeed yeah to get everybody to join in without dumbing down the content to still engage them
which of course is challenging as any writer of documentation would do absolutely but it's
really needed because I mean like there are loads of people out there who would like to be able to
use free and open source software in their daily lives but it's just sometimes for them this
feels more like a barrier and this kind of approach really preaches those this barrier and really
helps to like get people unborded from inner and yeah get them from the to collect them from
where they are standing and not be like first you need to step up here on my step and then we
can talk you know what I mean like it's more about like getting down to their level and say come
I'll take you with me come along yeah and also make sure that there's nothing that trips up
somebody where they might get lost along the way and then say okay this is too complicated this
is not for me and then give up I will watch this talk now because I'm like really
it did I already opened the tab so I will keep it you got me hooked in apart from the amazing
talks apparently that are happening there at Tito's and the workshops of course is there a
challenge that Tito's is also facing currently I heard you mentioning that there's also some
some wish to have more sponsors and to get people from outside the Netherlands attracted
there how do you want to achieve that is that a mean question no that's not a mean question how do
we want to achieve that by growing the event and making it more relevant and just I think
especially for sponsors it's amazing how many organizations are willing to sponsor if you ask
them and make sure that the events aligns with their goals because often the event does but they
are not aware of how what Tito's is and how it relates to them so I think sponsorship for example
is something that could be done a lot with effort from the core team to send out more messages
more emails do more calls to get more sponsors in and the second point of getting more attendees
I think that has to do with creating awareness so we're on pre-tube we are mustard on
now on a podcast we have been on other podcasts as well to grow as well
and reach more audience all right yeah I kind of found out was there so that was nice and he did
some interviews and also there's a Dutch Angry Nerds podcast and you imagine two tables joined
together and then like six people around it doing a collaborative podcast with a video live stream
so they were there I think the first time two years ago and they in the in the hole where there's
also the booths they just record the podcast they did that on Saturday and it did that on Sunday
it's like a special podcast edition but it's also something that reached an audience and there's
interaction when people from the booths or speakers can join in in the podcast and yeah it's really
fun in the sense that it's like oh yeah somebody joins in in the podcast say what I want to say
they have some discussion and it's like oh you you just get somebody else to fill up your seat
and we reached around the topic so it's a continuous podcast with new people coming in
maybe we can link it in the show notes that sounds really fun okay I'm very much looking forward
now to be there next year on the fifth and sixth of June yes is there also something that our
listeners can do as our final question to support Tito's and the organization yeah of course you
can all come to the conference next year or another year but also if please share all the announcements
and look at PiaTube what recordings of this year or the previous years and if you'd like something
please share it around and yeah give some some more buzz about Tito's very nice thank you so much
thank you so much also for taking the time and talking with me about Tito's very much
appreciated yeah thank you this was the software freedom podcast if you like this episode please
recommend Tito friends and rate it stay tuned for more inspiring conversations that
explority importance of software freedom and its impact on our digital lives this podcast is
presented to you by the free software foundation europe we are a charity that works on promoting
software freedom if you like our word please consider supporting us with our donation you find more
information under fsafi.org slash donate thank you so much bye bye